So, Professor Streamins, if you could start with Poppa and then, of course, the
unfortifiability principle. Now, anyone could, I don't think it's that hard, even for a layperson
like myself, to just Google what it means and get a very elementary understanding.
So perhaps you could firstly just explain what the Kyle Poppa, Popperian unfortifiability
principle is. But then also, as you've done in the book, rather well, maybe lay down some of your
criticisms, criticisms of it just for the audience. Yeah, sure. So Poppa thought that really the heart
of the scientific method was this very simple idea that if a theory makes a false prediction,
it has to be wrong somehow. And Poppa thought that at the core of the scientific inquiry was
the systematic elimination of all of the false theories. And notionally, of course, you could
imagine one day having eliminated them all and just having one true theory remaining, although
if Poppa was understood as well as anyone, that was not a realistic prospect. But he thought
we could at least think of ourselves as making progress by eliminating the false theories.
So the thing that makes that, oh, go ahead. No, I'm just going to ask, please continue.
I'm not going to follow up on that, but keep going. Yeah. Okay. So the thing that makes that,
though, now turning to where he begins to run into difficulties, and yeah, he had plenty of
things to say about these difficulties. It's not as if this is some sort of one-shot
undermining in his view. But it's really difficult when a theory does make a false
prediction to figure out whether it was really the theory's fault or not. Science is such a
complicated thing. And in particular, the kinds of measurement apparatus that are used to make
observations in cutting-edge science are often very complicated, fragile things that only work
when conditions are exactly right. 99.9% of the time, when you get a false prediction, it's not
really the theory's fault at all. It's just that something went wrong with the apparatus. Or maybe
you made a false assumption when you were making your calculations. Or maybe even, and this does
happen, there's an error in the software that you're using to analyze your results. And so it's not
really the theory's fault or not, and it would be a terrible mistake to throw away the theory,
just because you got this false prediction. So if you're going to capture the spirit of
Papa's proposal, you have to figure out some way of deciding when it's okay to just say,
oh, something went wrong with the apparatus. And when you should say, ah, no, this time,
it's the theory's fault. And so we've falsified the theory, as he says, we can throw away the theory.
Sometimes, of course, you can just see that something went wrong with the apparatus.
Like, you know, it's smoking, making, but often, in many cases in the history of science,
we have results that were anomalous and looked like they cross problems with theories and we
will never know what went wrong, because it's just too late to go back and check.
I'm sure we'll probably end up talking about some examples later on, but
but this Papa really never fully satisfactorily answered this question of when it's okay to blame
the apparatus or other assumptions, and when you should blame the theory.
I think he had, you know, he had interesting substantive things to say, but he didn't succeed
in writing down what he was really after, which was a kind of a systematic calculus, if you like,
for making these decisions, something that took these decisions out of the hands of scientists
who might be indulging in motivated reasoning, you know, trying to see their own theory in a good
light and just sort of said, no, you must follow this logic and this logic says your theory is wrong.
Yeah, because I haven't read his book where he introduced the principle of what's it called
the logic of science, I believe, but that's it. Yeah, I haven't read that book, although my
understanding, again, at a very elementary level is that it seems that Papa really wanted some kind
of a priori principle or even theory of science that allows scientists to do science. And then
what you would argue for and many others would be that Oh, well, unfortunately, for better or worse,
let's say, we haven't found that. Yeah. And so what you in fact have is, you know, I kind of made
it all sound like more like a philosophical argument, but the fact of science is you have real
arguments over these things should whether when to whether whether probably the result is just an
artifact of some problem with the measuring apparatus or the theory really is in trouble. In fact,
that's almost more normal than any other state of affairs. So some typically scientists who performed
in perform the experiment will trust the apparatus more than the scientists sort of a few labs over
who who weren't there to kind of see it all operating and so on. And you know, in the end,
when if scientists keep going for long enough, there does seem to be a kind of a consensus
that consensus that forms the experiments get done enough times been after different people.
It's not as if it's we're just totally at sea, but it doesn't have this simple crisp objective
algorithmic feel to it that Papa was really reaching for.
Yeah, yeah. Well, I guess that leads us to, I don't know if I should call it the antithesis,
but at least let's say we'll juxtapose Thomas Kuhn's theory that the paradigm shift, the term that he
popularized with the Popperian principle. Yeah, so the structures of scientific revolutions,
perhaps my favorite book on philosophy of science, yours is a healthy contender.
So in contrast to Karl Popper, Professor Srivence, what's, how does Thomas Kuhn differ? Because
he came after Popper, isn't that right? So Papa was, Papa wrote his book
in the 1930s and Kuhn wrote his book in the 1960s to give you some sense. So Popper is in a way,
essentially, into war, I suppose we would now say, and Kuhn is very much post-war. And Papa was
still kind of firing on all cylinders by then, but he wasn't presenting whole new ideas.
Well, he was entitled to kind of have a break. So Kuhn's idea is actually, it doesn't dispense
with the idea of a scientific method, as I was saying earlier, but rather the idea is that at any
particular time period, a science, say, like particle physics, or molecular genetics, or
economics, maybe microeconomics, will have a particular method, a particular set of rules
for doing science, and actually a rather comprehensive set of rules for doing science.
But that these methods are not fixed for all time. In fact, they change from time to time
in dramatic episodes called scientific revolutions, or the phrase that Kuhn famously popularized for
this is a paradigm shift. And the thing, the paradigm here is this kind of big method for
doing science. And when it shifts, that means the old paradigm has crumbled, and a new one
comes along and replaces it. So whereas Papa and sort of classic, the classic searches for a
scientific method, we're looking for a single rule that is valid for all time, as you said,
hopefully our priority, one that we can just know is right without, with certainty. Kuhn thought
these these methods only last for a while, and then their scientists actually pushed them to
the point where they're all of their flaws are exposed, because they're actually, they're very
rich, but they're also kind of limited, they have a lot of assumptions built in, and inevitably
some of those assumptions will turn out to be wrong. And so scientists pushed them to their
breaking point. And in effect, they, they destroy their own methods by by exposing the
faulty assumptions or whatever. And then some new method has to come along and supplant the old
method, a new paradigm comes along and supplants the old paradigm, that's a paradigm shift,
that's a scientific revolution, then you have a whole new methodological complex governing
what scientists do in in whatever area of science it is.